# ICU4X 0.2 Released

We are excited to announce the release of Unicode® ICU4X 0.2.

The revision improves completeness of the components introduced in ICU4X 0.1 and introduces a number of lower level utilities.

## Components

In 0.2, ICU4X improves `DateTimeFormat` adding initial support for time zones, component bags and day periods. A new `LocaleCanonicalizer` component has been added to support `Locale` data driven operations. A third improved component is `PluralRules` which has gained support for the `E` operand.

## Utilities

With a small set of core components maturing, the project is starting to focus more on the features we want to develop for all components such as strong FFI support and flexible data management.

For that purpose, we started building a number of lower level utilities focused on bringing high performance data structures and algorithms.

To minimize the size of our WASM binaries we added `Writeable`, which introduces a lightweight alternative to `Display` and `LiteMap`, which adds a `HashMap` replacement that uses `binary_search` instead of carrying with it a hashing logic.
`ZeroVec` is a utility similar to `Cow` which allows us to bring zero-copy deserialization of lists.
`FixedDecimal` and `Pattern` are two utilities that introduce lower level simple operations on numbers and ICU patterns.

### Summary

ICU4X 0.2 comes with more feature-complete components, new utilities and CLDR 38.1 support.
It is an unstable release, meaning that the API is in flux and functionality is not complete.

We're looking for testers and contributors interested in working with us on completing the funtionality intended for 1.0 release and the capabilities to bring ICU to FFI targets.

For details, please see [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/unicode-org/icu4x/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).
